roadmap planning 2024 post for January 3rd 2024 (#175)
geoserver/geoserver.github.io: _posts/2024-01-01-roadmap.md

With this in mind here are our priorities for 2024:

* **Migrate to spring-framework-6** (Deadline December 2024)

  GeoServer uses the spring-framework 5.3 which will reach end-of-life in December 2024. This provides motivation for all roadmap planning in calendar year 2024.
  
  *We are already getting concerned inquiries in response to CVE scans recommending upgrading to spring-framework 6. We look forward to your support of this activity*.

  In order to stay on a supported version of spring-framework we need to migrate to spring-framework 6.

* **Apache Wicket 9**

  Apache Wicket user-interface framework is used for the GeoServer Admin console screens.
  
  *Brad Hards has started this activity, and will require a fleet of testers to perform A/B testing of each screen. This is an impressive undertaking, in 2016 we did an entire round of fundraising to assemble a [team sprint]({% post_url 2016-01-25-geoserver-code-sprint-success %}) when updating from Apache Wicket 1.4.*
  

>   These use of spring-framework 6 above requires the use of Apache Wicket 9.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The use of spring-framework 6 and above requires the use of Apache Wicket 9.
```

  
* **Migrate to spring-security 6** 

  The spring-security framework is used by GeoServer for integrating with a number of systems.
  
  * Central Authentication Service (CAS)
  * Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  

>   Use of spring-framework 6 above requires the use of spring-security 6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Use of spring-framework 6 and above requires the use of spring-security 6.
```

  
* **Remove spring-security-oauth plugin**
  
  A number of popular community modules are built on spring-security-oauth plugin:
  
  * OAuth2 google
  * OAuth2 github
  * OAuth2 geonode
  * OAuth2 OpenID Connect
  

>   Support for OAuth2 is now included in spring-security framework rendering spring-security-oauth plugin superfluous. With this in mind spring-security-oauth plugin has reached end-of-life in May 2022 and is not supported at all on spring-security 6.

Author: This point is made in the next paragraph.

  
  Our GeoServer security integrations will need to be rewritten to use the spring-security framework directly. The good news is that this activity is available to be worked on immediately with spring-security 5.8 and then migrated to spring-security 6. Other projects such as GeoNetwork have already made the transition.

* **Remove spring-security-keycloak plugin**

  A community module offering keycloak integration will need to be rewritten or replaced.

>   The Keycloak team has announced that their spring-security-keycloak plugin has reached end-of-life and will be removed from a future release of Keycloak. They recommend migrating OAuth2/OpenID Connect support from spring-security 6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The Keycloak team has announced that their spring-security-keycloak plugin has reached end-of-life and will be removed from a future release of Keycloak. They recommend migrating to OAuth2/OpenID Connect support from spring-security 6.
```

>   *We recommend those using spring-security-keycloak plugin join forces in development and testing of OAuth2 OpenID Connect integration.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *We recommend those using the spring-security-keycloak plugin to join forces in development and testing of OAuth2/OpenID Connect integration.*
```

> * **Migrate to Java Enterprise Edition**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Migrate to Jakarta Enterprise Edition**
```

  
  With the change to Jakarta Enterprise Edition we expect a number of compatibility issues:
  
  * The charts extension is based on [eastwood charts](https://www.jfree.org/eastwood/) last updated in 2008.
    
    This library is not compatible with Jakarta Enterprise Edition and will need to be replaced.
    
  * mapfish-print-v2  
  
    This library is not compatible with Jakarta Enterprise Edition and will need to be updated or replaced. 
  
  Application Servers that support Jakarta Enterprise Edition:
  
  * Apache Tomcat 10.1 / Jakarta Enterprise Edition 10 / Servlet 6 / Java 17+
  * Jetty 12.0 / Jakarta Enterprise Edition 10 / Servlet 6 / Java 17+
  
  *When ready we will need volunteers to test on the new application servers and update the binary release and documentation to reflect the new environment. Organizations operating in a managed environment may wish to pursue permission to operate Tomcat 10.1 ahead of this planned change.*
  

>   The spring-framework 6 uses the newer Jakarta Enterprise Edition specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The spring-framework version 6 uses the newer Jakarta Enterprise Edition specification.
```

> * **Upgrade to Java 17** (Deadline October 2024)

Author: See below RHEL still lists October 2024 so I mentioned it by name.

>   GeoServer presently uses Java 11 LTS which reaches end-of-life on RHEL October 2024 (although other vendors provided continued support).

Author: I found the following article https://access.redhat.com/articles/1299013

  
  With the change to Java 17 we expect a number of libraries we use to require updating or replacing.
  
  *GeoServer is presently building on Java 17, however documentation will need to be updated when Java 11 support is dropped. Organizations may wish to pursue permission to operate Java 17 LTS ahead of this planned change.*
  
  The spring-framework 6 and Jakarta Enterprise Edition application servers require Java 17 as a minimum.
  
* **Migrate to ImageN 1.0**
  
  The Java Advanced Imaging library is used as the engine for our image and raster processing capabilities. This library reached end-of-life with the last JAI 1.1.3 release in 2005.
  
  This library has received considerable investment from our community with GeoSolutions heading up the JAI-EXT project to better work with geospatial datasets, operations and analysis including recent support for hyperspectral imagery.
  
  We have been planning for this migration for some time:
  

>   1. First working with Boundless to outline the creation of a new library ($150k) after assessing alternatives in the Java ecosystem (nothing matched JAI on-demand capabilities required for geospatial content).

Reviewer 2: I did not hear anything about this. Might want to add something like "This was an internal effort that was eventually dropped".

Author: I am trying to put dollar figures on the activity to indicate the sense of scale; I was doing the experiment at LocationTech so perhaps you did not notice at the time; although I think I shared the assessment of different image processing libraries.

Reviewer 2: I would still clarify the effort was abandoned and why.

Author: I have provided more background on the creation of the ImageN project.

  2. Then working with Oracle, resulting in the source code being donated to the Eclipse Foundation as the [ImageN](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.imagen) project (consider that a $100k savings)

>   3. Jody has worked on this project as a background activity when unemployed and the source code now compiles in a modern environment with documentation that has been migrated to markdown (consider that at $25k savings)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. Jody has worked on this project as a background activity when unemployed and the source code now compiles in a modern environment with documentation that has been migrated to markdown (consider that a $25k savings)
```

>   4. However test cases were not provided with the code donation (estimate 25k work remaining)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  4. However test cases were not provided with the code donation (estimate $25k work remaining)
```

---
author: Jody Garnett
layout: post
title: GeoServer 2024 Roadmap Planning
date: 2024-01-01
categories:   
- Behind The Scenes
---

Happy new year and welcome to 2024 from the GeoServer team!

The GeoServer team is doing something different this year: sharing our roadmap plans and asking our community for resources (participation and funding) to meet our 2024 goals.

![](/img/geoserver-logo.png)

> So far, our community has developed without a strong tradition of financial support - and we are looking to change this in the year ahead:

Author: Got it, going to try and approach as a rebalancing. Can use this blog post as some transparency with respect to the maintenance costs assisted with running an open source project.

> So far, our community has developed without a strong tradition of financial support - and we are looking to change this in the year ahead:

Author: Ended up with:

> The GeoServer project is supported and maintained thanks to the hard work of volunteers and the backing of companies providing professional support. 
> 
> We are seeking a healthy balance in 2024 and request increased support in the following areas:

With this in mind here are our priorities for 2024:

* **Migrate to spring-framework-6** (Deadline December 2024)

  GeoServer uses the spring-framework 5.3 which will reach end-of-life in December 2024. This provides motivation for all roadmap planning in calendar year 2024.
  
  *We are already getting concerned inquiries in response to CVE scans recommending upgrading to spring-framework 6. We look forward to your support of this activity*.

  In order to stay on a supported version of spring-framework we need to migrate to spring-framework 6.

* **Apache Wicket 10**

  Apache Wicket user-interface framework is used for the GeoServer Admin console screens.
  
  *Brad Hards has started this activity by going to the intermediate goal of Wicket 9, and will require a fleet of testers to perform A/B testing of each screen. This is an impressive undertaking, in 2016 we did an entire round of fundraising to assemble a [team sprint]({% post_url 2016-01-25-geoserver-code-sprint-success %}) when updating from Apache Wicket 1.4. to Wicket 7.x*
  

>   These use of spring-framework 6 above requires the use of Apache Wicket 10.

Author: ```suggestion
  The use of spring-framework 6 and above requires the use of Apache Wicket 10.
```

>   The use of spring-framework 6 and above requires the use of Apache Wicket 10.

Reviewer 3: This is possibly misleading. We need Java 17 for spring 6, and Wicket <= 9 requires Java <=11. However nothing in spring requires any version of wicket, AFAICT.

Author: How do we fix it? Just mention the Java 17 requirement, and move this further down the page?

```
The use java 17 requires the use of Apache Wicket 10.
```

Reviewer 2: Hum... actually I believe that current Wicket works fine with Java 17... but we definitely need Wicket 10 while upgrading to Spring 6, because Spring 6 is built on top of Jakarta EE, and Wicket 10 is the first "release" to support Jakarta EE as well. I'm saying "release" because Wicket 10 is at "milestone 2" stage, not sure if there is an ETA for it. Don't think it's going to be a problem anyways, so much work to do before we can consider an upgrade to Jakarta EE anyways.

Reviewer 3: Probably easiest that way - its a Java 17 driven change.

Author: Addressed with:

> The use of Jakarta Enterprise Edition requires the use of Apache Wicket 10.

  
* **Migrate to spring-security 6** 

  The spring-security framework is used by GeoServer for integrating with a number of systems.
  
  * Central Authentication Service (CAS)
  * Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  
  Use of spring-framework 6 and above requires the use of spring-security 6.
  
* **Remove spring-security-oauth plugin**
  
  A number of popular community modules are built on spring-security-oauth plugin:
  
  * OAuth2 google
  * OAuth2 github
  * OAuth2 geonode
  * OAuth2 OpenID Connect
  

>   Support for OAuth2 in GeoServer is based on the deprecaed spring-security-oauth library. The same functionality is now provided by  spring-security itself, but exposing a different API, making the GeoServer plugin incompatible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Support for OAuth2 in GeoServer is based on the deprecated spring-security-oauth library. The same functionality is now provided by  spring-security itself, but exposing a different API, making the GeoServer plugin incompatible.
```

  
  With the change to Jakarta Enterprise Edition we expect a number of compatibility issues:
  
  * The charts extension is based on [eastwood charts](https://www.jfree.org/eastwood/) last updated in 2008.
    
    This library is not compatible with Jakarta Enterprise Edition and will need to be replaced.
    
  * mapfish-print-v2  
  
    This library is not compatible with Jakarta Enterprise Edition and will need to be updated or replaced. 
  
  Application Servers that support Jakarta Enterprise Edition:
  
  * Apache Tomcat 10.1 / Jakarta Enterprise Edition 10 / Servlet 6 / Java 17+
  * Jetty 12.0 / Jakarta Enterprise Edition 10 / Servlet 6 / Java 17+
  
  *When ready we will need volunteers to test on the new application servers and update the binary release and documentation to reflect the new environment. Organizations operating in a managed environment may wish to pursue permission to operate Tomcat 10.1 ahead of this planned change.*
  
  The spring-framework version 6 uses the newer Jakarta Enterprise Edition specification.
  

> * **Upgrade to Java 17** (Deadline October 2024)

Author: ```suggestion
* **Upgrade to Java 17**
```

>   GeoServer presently uses Java 11 LTS which reaches end-of-life on RHEL October 2024 (although other vendors provided continued support).

Author: ```suggestion
  GeoServer is presently compiled with Java 11 LTS, with the result tested on Java 11 LTS, Java 17 LTS, and soon Java 21 LTS.
```

  
  With the change to Java 17 we expect a number of libraries we use to require updating or replacing.
  
  *GeoServer is presently building on Java 17, however documentation will need to be updated when Java 11 support is dropped. Organizations may wish to pursue permission to operate Java 17 LTS ahead of this planned change.*
  
  The spring-framework 6 and Jakarta Enterprise Edition application servers require Java 17 as a minimum.
  
* **Migrate to ImageN 1.0**
  
  The Java Advanced Imaging library is used as the engine for our image and raster processing capabilities. This library reached end-of-life with the last JAI 1.1.3 release in 2005.
  
  This library has received considerable investment from our community with GeoSolutions heading up the JAI-EXT project to better work with geospatial datasets, operations and analysis including recent support for hyperspectral imagery.
  
  We have been planning for this migration for some time:
  

>   1. First working with Boundless to outline the creation of a new library ($150k) after assessing alternatives in the Java ecosystem (nothing matched JAI on-demand capabilities required for geospatial content).

Author: ```suggestion
  1. Boundless worked with LocationTech to outline the creation of a new library ($150k) after assessing alternatives in the Java ecosystem (nothing matched JAI on-demand capabilities required for geospatial content).
```

>   2. Then working with Oracle, resulting in the source code being donated to the Eclipse Foundation as the [ImageN](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.imagen) project (consider that a $100k savings)

Author: ```suggestion
  2. LocationTech was able to contact Oracle, resulting in the source code being donated to the Eclipse Foundation as the [ImageN](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.imagen) project (consider that a $100k savings)
```
